---
layout: post
title: "The 2022-2023 NBA MVP"
date: 2022-12-30
description: "The NBA MVP so far"
giscus_comments: true
toc:
  sidebar: left
tags: basketball
---

The 2022-2023 MVP race feels especially close this year. With Luka posting up more and the resurgence of KD, it feels like there are 5-7 players competing for the "best player in the NBA" title. This has affected the MVP race, where there have been 5 changes in the KIA MVP Ladder's #1 spot.

1. Giannis Antetokounmpo (Week 1-2)
2. Luka Doncic (Week 3-4)
3. Jayson Tatum (Week 5-7)
4. Giannis Antetokounmpo (Week 8)
5. Nikola Jokic (Week 9)

Part of the reason is that there is no single criteria for MVP. There multiple axes, individual and team, along which players are evaluated and compared.

## Criteria

### Individual Stats

All else being equal, player A should be ranked above player B if player A is better statistics. With the analytics revolution, there is an increased emphasis on advanced statistics TS which try to summarize player's performance in single numbers. We will use the traditional slash line (PPG/RPG/APG), true shooting, basketball reference's BPM, and NBA's PIE.

### Team Performance

All else being equal, player A should be ranked above player B if player A's team has a better record. Both the relative record and absolute record matter. We will use the conference ranking and W-L record.

### With You vs. Without You

All else being equal, player A should be ranked above player B if player A provides a bigger boost to his team. Player A is more essential to their team winning than player B. We will use on/off net rating.

### Playing Time

All else being equal, player A should be ranked above player B if player A plays more minutes and games. If a player misses time, they are not providing any value for their team on the court. We will use proportion of games played and minutes per game.

## What's the MVP Ladder

Let's look at the metrics of the most recent [KIA MVP Ladder](https://www.nba.com/news/kia-mvp-ladder-dec-30-2022-edition) to determine who the MVP should be if the season ended now.

| Player                  | Points | Rebounds | Assists | TS%  | BPM  | PIE  | Rank | W-L   | On/Off Net | Games | Minutes |
| ----------------------- | ------ | -------- | ------- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ----- | ---------- | ----- | ------- |
| Nikola Jokic            | 25.5   | 10.9     | 9.5     | 68.6 | 12.2 | 20.9 | 2    | 23-12 | 24.8       | 32/35 | 33.7    |
| Jayson Tatum            | 31.0   | 8.1      | 4.0     | 61.3 | 5.7  | 16.7 | 1    | 26-10 | 11.0       | 34/36 | 36.9    |
| Luka Doncic             | 33.7   | 8.8      | 8.9     | 61.8 | 11.5 | 21.8 | 6    | 20-16 | 8.9        | 33/36 | 36.9    |
| Kevin Durant            | 29.9   | 6.9      | 5.4     | 67.2 | 6.9  | 18.6 | 3    | 23-12 | 7.0        | 34/35 | 36.4    |
| Giannis Antetokounmpo   | 32.1   | 11.8     | 5.2     | 58.9 | 7.9  | 19.7 | 2    | 23-12 | -0.8       | 30/35 | 33.7    |
| Joel Embiid             | 33.8   | 9.7      | 4.3     | 64.0 | 8.5  | 21.1 | 5    | 20-14 | 8.2        | 26/34 | 35.7    |
| Zion Williamson         | 26.2   | 6.9      | 4.6     | 65.3 | 6.3  | 17.0 | 1    | 23-12 | 6.4        | 27/35 | 33.3    |
| Ja Morant               | 26.8   | 6.2      | 8.1     | 54.5 | 5.6  | 17.2 | 3    | 21-13 | 9.0        | 29/34 | 32.5    |
| Jaylen Brown            | 27.0   | 7.2      | 3.4     | 59.0 | 1.6  | 13.8 | 1    | 26-10 | -3.3       | 34/36 | 35.8    |
| Donovan Mitchell        | 28.4   | 3.8      | 4.5     | 62.7 | 6.7  | 15.2 | 4    | 22-14 | -3.8       | 32/36 | 36.3    |
| Devin Booker            | 27.1   | 4.6      | 5.6     | 58.5 | 4.0  | 14.4 | 7    | 20-17 | 6.1        | 29/37 | 34.6    |
| Stephen Curry           | 30.0   | 6.6      | 6.8     | 66.8 | 9.4  | 17.9 | 9    | 19-18 | 15.2       | 26/37 | 34.4    |
| Shai Gilgeous-Alexander | 31.4   | 4.8      | 5.8     | 62.1 | 6.9  | 17.4 | 12   | 15-20 | 4.8        | 32/35 | 35.8    |
| Julius Randle           | 23.8   | 9.7      | 3.7     | 59.1 | 4.0  | 14.6 | 8    | 18-18 | -0.3       | 36/36 | 34.7    |
| Domantas Sabonis        | 18.6   | 12.3     | 6.7     | 68.9 | 6.8  | 16.9 | 5    | 19-15 | 10.7       | 33/34 | 33.8    |

Right away, we can eliminate Jaylen Brown. For every metrics, his value is equal or worse than that of his teammate Jayson Tatum. We can also eliminate several guards who are worse than their peers in all but one metric.

- **Devin Booker**. Luka Doncic beats Devin Booker in every metric.
- **Donovan Mitchell**. Kevin Durant beats Donovan Mitchell in every metric.
- **Shai Gilgeous-Alexander**. Luka Doncic beats SGA in every metric except for a 0.3 lead in true shooting, which is negligible.
- **Ja Morant**. Nikola Jokic beats Ja Morant in every metric except for a 1.3 lead in points per game, which is negligible.

Interestingly, all eliminated players form a continuous block from 7-13 in KIA MVP ladder, save for Steph Curry. These players are the most overrated in the KIDA MVP ladder. We can eliminate 3 more players at the bottom of the KIA MVP ladder by comparing them to Nikola Jokic.

-  **Stephen Curry**. Nikola Jokic beats Stephen Curry in every metric except 4.5 points per game and 0.7 minutes per game. The additional 4.5 points are not trivial, but this alone is not enough to outweigh the gap in team performance and playing time.
- **Julius Randle**. Nikola Jokic beats Julius Randle in every metric except for 3 games played and 0.1 minutes per game. The extra 3 games are not trivial so early into the season, but Jokic is better than Randle in every individual statistic. This gap is more impressive.
- **Zion Williamson**. Nikola Jokic beats Zion Williamson in every metric except for 0.7 points per game and team ranking, even thought both teams have the same record. Both are negligible.

All eliminated players are 7-14 in the KIA MVP ladder. This means that the ladder is pretty good, aside from massively underrating Sabonis. The upper half of the MVP race is Nikola Jokic, Jayson Tatum, Luka Doncic, Kevin Durant, Giannis Antetokounmpo, Joel Embiid, and Domantas Sabonis. Of these, Sabonis is the easiest to eliminate. He leads Jokic in 4 metrics: 1.4 rebounds, 0.1 TS%, 1 game played, and 0.1 minutes per game. Only the 1.4 lead in rebounds per game is non-negligible, but Jokic has much larger leads in points and team performance. This leaves 6 players remaining in the MVP race.

| Player                | Points | Rebounds | Assists | TS%  | BPM  | PIE  | Rank | W-L   | On/Off Net | Games | Minutes |
| --------------------- | ------ | -------- | ------- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ----- | ---------- | ----- | ------- |
| Nikola Jokic          | 25.5   | 10.9     | 9.5     | 68.6 | 12.2 | 20.9 | 2    | 23-12 | 24.8       | 32/35 | 33.7    |
| Jayson Tatum          | 31.0   | 8.1      | 4.0     | 61.3 | 5.7  | 16.7 | 1    | 26-10 | 11.0       | 34/36 | 36.9    |
| Luka Doncic           | 33.7   | 8.8      | 8.9     | 61.8 | 11.5 | 21.8 | 6    | 20-16 | 8.9        | 33/36 | 36.9    |
| Kevin Durant          | 29.9   | 6.9      | 5.4     | 67.2 | 6.9  | 18.6 | 3    | 23-12 | 7.0        | 34/35 | 36.4    |
| Giannis Antetokounmpo | 32.1   | 11.8     | 5.2     | 58.9 | 7.9  | 19.7 | 2    | 23-12 | -0.8       | 30/35 | 33.7    |
| Joel Embiid           | 33.8   | 9.7      | 4.3     | 64.0 | 8.5  | 21.1 | 5    | 20-14 | 8.2        | 26/34 | 35.7    |

Embiid and Giannis are the first to drop out. They have played the least number of games. Since the season is still young, missing 8 and 5 games is significant. They do not have vastly superior individual statistics, team performance, or contribution in the form of on/off net rating to make up for this gap. Both are great defenders, but their defense is not valuable when they are on the bench. Moreover, Embiid and Giannis are arguably the worst offensive players of the 6, due to their passing and, for Giannis, efficiency limitations due to his inability to shoot. Thus, the top 4 MVP candidates are Nikola Jokic, Jayson Tatum, Luka Doncic, and Kevin Durant. Determining the MVP from here will require subjective arguments weighing the important of some metrics over others.

1. **Jayson Tatum**. Although Jayson Tatum's team has had the best record, his individual statistics are entirely dwarfed by Luka Donic's. Since the MVP award is to an individual, the gap in individual performance is more important than the gap in team performance.
2. **Kevin Durant**. Kevin Durant scores more points per game than Jokic, but Jokic's passing advantage provides a minimum of 10 extra points to his team per game. With Kyrie Irving, Kevin Durant has a better supporting cast than Jokic with Jamal Murry still recovering from his ACL injury in 2021. The Nuggets get a bigger boost from Jokic than the Net's do from Kevin Durant.
3. **Luka Doncic**. While the Maverick's superstar is having a season for the ages, I think Jokic's efficiency gap and team performance gap are more important than Doncic's extra points per game. Jokic's lesser points per game reflect a greater interest in passing than scoring, even though he has the ability to score more points. Against the Warriors in the playoffs, he averaged 31.0 PPG on 64.3 TS%. His lack of scoring is not hurting the Nugget's offense, which has an offensive rating of 132.9 with Jokic on the court vs. 123.8 with Doncic.

If the season were to end right now, I would hand the MVP trophy to Nikola Jokic for the third time. Of course, the season is not over and the extra ~50 games will make it much easier to determine the MVP.
